Added a blog on Unity (Distributed Spatial Diversity Using UnetStack) (#45)
org-arl/unet-blog: _posts/2020-03-30-exploting-spatial-diversity-using-unetstack3.md

---
layout: post
comments: true
title: Exploiting Dsitributed Spatial Diversity Using UnetStack
date: 30/03/2020
author: Prasad Anjangi
categories: howto
feature-img: "assets/img/sd-unet.jpg"
thumbnail: "assets/img/sd-unet.jpg"

> tags: [howto, spatial diversity, cooperative diversity, robustness, data rate, performance boost]

Reviewer: - "cooperative communication" rather than "cooperative diversity"?

We might want to ratify a set of tags that we should use across all blogs.

Author: Fixed.

---

> Though it has been a buzzword over the past several years in the terrestrial radio frequency (RF) based wireless networks, much is not talked about practical spatial diversity systems in underwater wireless networks. It has proved and delivered tangible benefits to the end-user in the terrestrial wireless networks. Can we exploit this technique to make underwater wireless networks faster and more reliable and make that long-range communication link "just work" ? With the capability to exploit distributed spatial diversity, yes you can!

Reviewer: Is "spatial diversity systems" really a buzzword in terrestrial RF? I feel that we are shortchanging ourselves by claiming that this has been done in RF. As far as I am aware, it hasn't. And the patent process hasn't dug up anything yet either.

Author: I rewrote the introduction now to better present the value and the differentiation.

Reviewer: > Although it has proved and delivered tangible benefits to the end-user in the terrestrial wireless networks,  much is not talked about practical spatial diversity systems in underwater wireless networks.

This simply isn't true. There's plenty of papers talking about spatial diversity systems in underwater networks. Our push here is about implementing it in a distributed fashion.

Author: Agreed. In the latest update, I moved this sentence as this does not fit here. I have mentioned that distributed spatial diversity does provide tangible benefits in UW link when I conclude.

### What's the key idea involved in distributed spatial diversity ?

> *Multiple communication nodes deployed at spatially distinct locations can receive independent copies of the same information. This group of receiver nodes can act as a combined spatial diversity receiver when they cooperate by sharing copies of information. We term this distributed spatial diversity. The framework supporting this patent-pending technique is implemented in UnetStack 3.1 and is referred to as `Unity`.*

Reviewer: Perhaps _Unity_ rather than `Unity`?

Author: Fixed.

> ![Overview](../assets/img/sd.png)

Reviewer 2: "Assisting Receiver" of the text in the diagram goes outside the oval. Can we fix that?

Author: Fixed.

An illustration of the general overview of such a receiver system is shown above and few terminologies might help for further discussion:

- *Transmitter:* A node which transmits information
- *Main receiver:* A node that acts as the main receiver in a group of receiver nodes. It is the main receiver's responsibility to decode the information.
- *Assisting receiver:* A node that acts as an assisting receiver in a group of receiver nodes. It is the assisting receiver's responsibility to forward the relevant information to the main receiver.

> The two assisting receiver nodes are in cahoots with the main receiver to cooperatively share the information! This sharing of information usually happens over a short-range wired or wireless network (e.g., WiFi, TCP/IP, UDP/IP). Although, nothing stops one from using a different technology for sharing information.

Author: Fixed.

### What's the immediate practical advantage one can see ?

Consider a case where you are on a ship with a modem deployed and you've been receiving status updates from a deployed AUV every few minutes. The AUV moves into an area where the connectivity is poor, and you can no longer successfully receive the status reports. We've all experienced being in that situation where the underwater communication link breaks, haven't we?

If you have a second modem available on the ship, you deploy it from another part of the ship. Or maybe there is a gateway buoy deployed nearby with a modem, and you can connect to its modem. Either way, the distributed spatial diversity technique (`Unity`) magically uses the information from both modems to recover connectivity to the AUV!

### So how to use `Unity` in UnetStack 3.1?

> The `Unity` is implemented as a premium agent and is available with the latest UnetStack 3.1 release. It allows users to transparently implement spatial diversity with a set of COTS UnetStack-based underwater acoustic modems, each with only a single receiver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Unity` is available as a premium agent and requires UnetStack 3.1 and higher.
```

> The `Unity` is implemented as a premium agent and is available with the latest UnetStack 3.1 release. It allows users to transparently implement spatial diversity with a set of COTS UnetStack-based underwater acoustic modems, each with only a single receiver.

Reviewer: Just "Unity" rather than "The `Unity`"?

Author: Fixed.

Configuring and using the `Unity` agent to exploit spatial diversity is easy with just two simple steps:

1. Setup the receiver nodes to cooperate.
2. Add the `Unity` agent on the main receiver.

#### 1. Set up for receiver nodes to cooperate (an example):

> To set up the group of receivers to cooperate over a short-range network, we use [`Wormhole`](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_preface.html)  agent provided in the latest release UnetStack 3.1.  Transmitter node makes a transmission that is heard at all the receiver nodes. However, none of the nodes are able to successfully recover the information received, as the communication link is noisy.  In order to share the received noisy signals among the receivers, we can connect the receiver nodes using a `Wormhole`. A connection over a UDP link over a WiFi network is established by adding just a few lines of code on the receiver nodes as shown below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set up the group of receivers to cooperate over a short-range network, we use [`Wormhole`](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_preface.html)  agent provided in the latest release UnetStack 3.1.  Transmitter node makes a transmission that is heard at all the receiver nodes. However, none of the nodes are able to successfully recover the information received, as the communication link is noisy.  In order to share the received noisy signals among the receivers, we can connect the receiver nodes using a `Wormhole`. A UDP connection between the two receiver nodes, over any IP based network (Ethernet, WiFi), can be established by adding just a few lines of code on the receiver nodes as shown below:
```

> To set up the group of receivers to cooperate over a short-range network, we use [`Wormhole`](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_preface.html)  agent provided in the latest release UnetStack 3.1.  Transmitter node makes a transmission that is heard at all the receiver nodes. However, none of the nodes are able to successfully recover the information received, as the communication link is noisy.  In order to share the received noisy signals among the receivers, we can connect the receiver nodes using a `Wormhole`. A connection over a UDP link over a WiFi network is established by adding just a few lines of code on the receiver nodes as shown below:

Reviewer: - Change link to the Wormhole chapter when it is ready.
- Might want to avoid "latest", as the blog article will outlive the time the 3.1 release is the _latest_ one.

Author: - Will change the `wormhole` link once the handbook is published.
- Fixed.

Author: Fixed the wormhole link.

```groovy

> container.add 'udp', new UdpLink()            (1)

Reviewer: People may try typing `(1)` in the console, or copy and paste the whole line. If you want to tag a line, you should use valid code, i.e., but the tag in a comment: `// (1)`.

Reviewer: Resolved by @notthetup's fixes.

container.add 'wormhole', new WormHole()
wormhole.dsp = 'udp'
```

> Line number (1) adds a [`UdpLink`](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_wired_and_over_the_air_links.html) agent that implements a link protocol over UDP/IP for use over wired/wireless IP networks. The next step is to add the `Wormhole` agent and make it utilize the infrastructure provided by the `UdpLink` agent to allow the agents residing on receivers nodes to transparently talk to each other!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Line number (1) adds a [`UdpLink`](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_wired_and_over_the_air_links.html) agent that implements a link protocol over UDP/IP for use over wired/wireless IP networks.
```

> Line number (1) adds a [`UdpLink`](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_wired_and_over_the_air_links.html) agent that implements a link protocol over UDP/IP for use over wired/wireless IP networks. The next step is to add the `Wormhole` agent and make it utilize the infrastructure provided by the `UdpLink` agent to allow the agents residing on receivers nodes to transparently talk to each other! 

Reviewer: I find the use of "line number" to refer to `(1)` odd, as it might work in this example, but there is no guarantee that it would work in general (you might not tag each line of a code example). Better to say "Line (1)" or "Command (1)"?

Reviewer: Resolved by @notthetup's fixes.

> Line number (2) adds a `Wormhole` agent which allows the [fjåge](https://fjage.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) messages to be sent between containers over a [Unet link](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_introduction.html).

Reviewer 2: Is "Unet Link" the right term here?

Author: Yes, I believe. The Unet link is set to `UdpLink` in line (3).

> Line number (2) adds a `Wormhole` agent which allows the [fjåge](https://fjage.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) messages to be sent between containers over a [Unet link](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_introduction.html). 

Reviewer: Reminder: Change link for Wormhole.

> Line number (3) tells the `Wormhole` agent to utilize the `UdpLink` as the Unet link to share information. For more details on the `Wormhole` agent, please refer to this [link](https://unetstack.net/handbook/unet-handbook_preface.html).

Reviewer: Wormhole was already linked in this section. I don't think you need to add a statement to refer to it again here.

*Additional set up on the assisting receiver* :

We may not want to share the information from all agents, instead, we are interested in messages that are published on the Physical agent's topic on the main receiver.
```groovy
wormhole.broadcast = [topic(phy), topic(phy, Physical.SNOOP)]
```

> The above line of code is added only on the assisting receivers to forward only the messages received on the `Physical` agent's topic to be sent over the `Wormhole` link.

Reviewer: - Do you want to put a note saying that the warning you receive can be safely ignored?
- More generally, would it make sense to show shell input/output in shell interaction examples, rather than just the code that you type?

#### 2. Add the `Unity` agent on the main receiver:

Now that the receiver nodes are ready to cooperate, we can go ahead and add the `Unity` agent on the main receiver node. 

```groovy

> container.add 'unity', new Unity()

Reviewer: Is it imported by default? Do you need to add package names?  
(same question applies to `Wormhole` ... we currently don't automatically import these both packages)

Author: Updated to the full class name. Fixed in the updated blog.

```

> If a user wishes to take a look at the parameters of the `Unity` agent after loading the agent, type `unity` on the node's web shell interface:

Reviewer: Why "if"? Either ask them to do it, or not.

Author: Fixed.

```
> unity
« Spatial diversity agent »

Combines copies of information received from multiple 
receivers to decode packets.

[org.arl.unet.unity.UnityParam]
  assisters = []
  enable = false
  maxAssisterRange = 100.0
  phy = phy
```
The `assisters` parameter is used to store the node addresses of the assisting receivers that are assisting the main receiver. The user might also want to change the default value of `maxAssisterRange` if the furthest assisting receiver to the main receiver is at a distance larger than 100 m.

```groovy

> unity.assisters = [< first_assister_address >, <second_assister_address>]

Reviewer: Careful again ... people might type: `< first_assister_address >, <second_assister_address>`. Better to use actual node addresses (will also clarify potential confusion about IP address or node address or any other address), and say something like "If the assister node address is ..., then ...".

Author: Fixed.

assister.enable = true
```

> Once the assisters node addresses are set, as shown above, the `Unity` agent is enabled. And voila, you are ready to see the benefits of cooperating receivers in terms of reliability and effective data rate. 

Reviewer: Kinds feels anticlimax here, because no results! I know its hard to demonstrate, but maybe a para about what to expect would be nice, as a closing statement.

Author: Add more details now on what to expect along with the shell instructions and screenshots.

> **NOTE**: We will be sharing white papers and material detailing the protocol implemented once it is available. Until then, for keen readers and folks interested in knowing more details on learning and using this technology, please get in touch by emailing at [info@subnero.com](https://subnero.com/contact/). 

Reviewer: "they", not "it". But I find this note awkward. Get feedback from others and decide.

Author: Removed this as I found it odd too in the second reading. Add much more details on the expected results instead.
